# Malawi National Adaptation Plan

## Introduction

The NAP is the main vehicle for adaptation planning for the country, and encompasses activities at all relevant scales and levels, from the regional (multi-country level) to the national, sectoral, sub-national and local levels, including for specific municipalities. All recent adaptation strategies and plans will thus be included in the NAP as a master plan for adaptation, indicating what is ongoing and what remains to be addressed. [S/T reporting]

As a country with limited resources, most adaptation projects will be funded through international sources, with very little dependence on national budgets, at least to begin with. During implementation, activities will need to be well aligned and integrated with sectoral activities funded by government. [Link to GCF Country Programme]

There are many reporting channels under the UNFCCC and the Paris agreement that require information on adaptation (priorities, key vulnerabilities, adaptation actions, capacity gaps and needs, etc). The work under the process of formulating and implementing the NAP will provide the central basis for adaptation assessment and prioritization, and will inform all necessary reporting on adaptation, in particular, the update of the NDCs by 2020, and future national communications/transparency reports. [NAP informing Draft NDC in 2020]

The NAP road map for Malawi includes all activities that contribute to adaptation planning and the NAP in particular since the advent of the NAP decisions in 2010/11, and this is designed to be the guiding rail for all adaptation activities for the country and is the basis for support being received by all those in a position to do so. The recently funded NAP formulation proposal under the GCF Readiness Support is naturally a major form of financial support and will be used to continue the work of analysis, assessment, implementation and further planning. Support from others continues to be very critical for the success of adaptation efforts for the country. [Road Map]

The office of the UNFCCC Focal Point, housed in the Environmental Affairs Department, is the current custodian of work on the NAP and will continue to work with all relevant ministries, organizations and actors as necessary, maintaining and running the continuing process of adaptation monitoring, assessment and planning, the support the periodic production of NAPs. [National mandate, CC policy/law, Data Policy, coherence with other MEAs]

The NAP is a living document and will continue to be updated as the need arises, with a view to producing a formal updated version every 5 years. By the same vein, all intermediate outputs (stocktaking report, road map, assessment reports, framework document, monitoring and evaluation plans, climate investment strategy, etc) will remain living documents and will be updated as new information and new insights arise. [Wiki collection of documents for easy update, later morph into a DIVA – dynamic impacts, vuln and adaptation system]

The NAP follows the UNFCCC technical guidelines for the NAP process, and the collection of supplements to these guidelines as developed by different organizations and available on NAP Central.

Applies the NAP-SDG iFrame to manage multiple entry points and coherence with various frameworks being addressed including the SDGs, Sendai Framework, New Urban Agenda, Africa 2063, and relevant national strategies.

There are several major assessments conducted in the last 5 years, and the approach taken is not to promote yet another vulnerability and risk assessment, rather to build on available information and identify any obvious gaps if any. The concept of risk is adapted, following good examples from countries and organizations that have developed recent guidelines, including New Zealand, and OECD.

The traditional approach of arriving at projects as the main outcome of these assessments is improved upon by identifying appropriate methods and metrics that in fact support a risk-based approach.

#### Building on the unfunded PPCR/SPCR ####

There are several ongoing projects and programmes that address adaptation to climate change in Malawi, as well as main development objectives. The NAP will build on these projects and scale up efforts as appropriate. 

One approach to make progress on the NAP would be to build on the PPCR/SPCR that was produced in November 2017, but for which CIF/PPCR funding dried up and is now left to find alternative funding sources. The PPCR/SPCR focused on three important sectors of agriculture, fisheries and water resources, and presents five priority programmes to implement proposed adaptation activities. The process of developing the SPCR are similar to that of the NAP and follow good practice in ensuring full participation of stakeholders, gender responsiveness, and builds on national development priorities.

## Approach ##

The formulation of the NAP follows the guiding principles and technical guidelines as outlined in UNFCCC COP decision 5/CP.17. It embraces the country-driven, country-owned and iterative approach.
The latest technical guidance from the NAP Technical Working Group is followed, based on the NAP-SDG iFrame toolkit.

## Key Risks and Vulnerabilities

### Baseline period 1961 to 1990 and trends to the present

#### Observations since 1960

*	Temperature increases of approximately 0.9°C, with the most rapid increase in summer months (Dec–Feb), between 1960 and 2006.
*	Increase in the number of days (+30 days) and nights (+41 days) considered “hot.”
*	Highly variable year-to-year rainfall totals with no statistically significant trends.
*	Increased length of dry spells during the rainy season.
*	Increased intensity, frequency and magnitude of floods and droughts.

#### Projected climate for the next 20, 50, 100 years

*	Higher average temperatures of 1–3°C by 2050, with largest increases in early summer months.
*	Increase in the number of days and nights considered “hot” by 2060.
*	Overall increases or decreases in rainfall difficult to project.
*	Later onset/earlier cessation of rainy season.
*	Increase in average monthly rainfall from Dec–Jan and a decrease from Feb–April.
*	Increases in the proportion of rainfall during extreme events of up to 19 percent annually by 2090.

Source: For the summary, USAID 2017. Climate change risk profile Malawi.Fact Sheet. 

### Key climate hazards ###

*	Prolonged Drought/dry spells
*	Global and regional drought spells
*	Torrential rainfall/Change (increase) in frequency and intensity of heavy rainfall events
*	Local storm events
*	Global and regional storm events
*	Lightning
*	Hot spells/temperature extremes
*	Shifting (rainfall/growing) seasons
*	Increase in temperatures
*	Non-normal annual weather
*	Pests and diseases outbreaks associated with climate events
*	Disruption of national, regional and global food supply chains
*	Wildfire

### Systems at Risk

#### Crop production

#### Food security

#### Urban water supply

#### Hydroelectricity generation

#### Urban flooding

#### Lake Malawi and its many functions

#### Lake Chilwa and its many functions

#### Degraded forest ecosystems and their services

#### Infrastructure at risk

#### Human health and well-being

#### Climate-related disasters

## Priority Adaptation Actions

Goals, objectives and expected outcomes of adaptation

Taking a medium- to long-term approach and avoiding maladaptation

#### 1. National climate change adaptation programme: umbrella programme

#### 2. Projects and programmes to address key risks for the country

* Climate Resilient Integrated Watershed Management (Total: US$ 84 million, PPCR/SPCR)
* Building Climate Change Resilience in Selected Agricultural Value Chains in Malawi (Total: US$ 26 million, PPCR/SPCR)
* Sustainable Fisheries Sector and Fisheries Value Chain in Malawi through Improved Climate Resilient Lake Ecosystem Conservation and Management (Total: US$ 18.2 million, PPCR/SPCR)
* Strengthening Climate Resilience of Smallholder Farmers in Malawi (Total: US$ 13.5 million, PPCR/SPCR- FAO)
* Operationalising Malawi’s Climate Services Centre (Total: US$ 17.3 million, PPCR/SPCR)
* Forest landscape restoration programme
* Lake Malawi Ecosystem
* Lake Chilwa Ecosystem and Value Chains
* National physical development planning under climate change
* Building a resilient national food security

#### 3. Essential cross-cutting projects/programmes
 Creating an effective adaptation process and system (mainstreaming/integration, policies, governance, etc.)
* Climate information services and early warnings systems, systematic observations
* Active monitoring of key systems: crop production, water resources, ecosystems, etc
* M&E system – individual projects and in aggregate for the country
* Capacity development for implementation of adaptation and support to the process including data and information management, etc

## Implementation Strategy

Alignment with the GCF country programme
The priorities in the NAP will form the 5-year country programme for engagement with the GCF as follows:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5

## References 

