## Main references for the Malawi Open NAP

Aragie, Emerta, Karl Pauw, and Valentina Pernechele. “Achieving Food Security and Industrial Development in Malawi: Are Export Restrictions the Solution?” World Development 108 (August 2018): 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2018.03.020.

Hughes, Nigel Ross, Simon Croxton, and Louise E. M. Croneborg. “Malawi Country Environmental Analysis.” The World Bank, January 1, 2019. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/508561550587004266/Malawi-Country-Environmental-Analysis.

Meerman, Janice; Aberman, Noora-Lisa; Harris, Jody; and Pauw, Karl. 2018. Indicators for examining links between agriculture, food security, and nutrition. In Agriculture, food security, and nutrition in Malawi: Leveraging the links, eds. Noora-Lisa Aberman, Janice Meerman, and Todd Benson. Chapter 2, Pp. 17-29. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). https://doi.org/10.2499/9780896292864_02

Hurford, A.P., S.D. Wade, and J. Winpenny. “Malawi Case Study: Harnessing Hydropower.” Evidence on Demand, December 2014. https://doi.org/10.12774/eod_cr.september2014.hurfordaetal04.

Malawi, and Environmental Affairs Department. National Climate Change Management Policy, 2016.

Kaluma, Felix N. D., Stephen K. Machira, Patrick C. Kamwendo, and Malawi, eds. National Environmental Action Plan. Lilongwe: Malawi, Dept. of Research and Environmental Affairs, 1994.

Malawi, ed. The Second National Communication of the Republic of Malawi under the Conference of the Parties (COP) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Lilongwe, Malawi: Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Environment, 2011.



